---
title: Visual Studio 2008 Released to MSDN Subscribers
date:  2007-11-20 00:00:00 -0700
layout: single
---

While Visual Studio was originally planned to be released in February of 2008, November 19th 2007 seemed like a better release date for Microsoft. MSDN Subscribers can already download the Retail versions of Visual Studio 2008 Professional, Standard and the Visual Studio Express editions through their Top Subscriber Downloads screen when logged on to MSDN.

At the moment downloads seem very slow (probably due to high network traffic) and connections might fail. Remember: because Microsoft is offering this through the Top Subscriber Downloads box, the downloads will open in an Akamai window instead of the regular Transfer Manager offered by Microsoft; this causes problems.

[Click here to log into your MSDN subscriber Account](https://web.archive.org/web/20080117164126/http://msdn2.microsoft.com/en-us/subscriptions/default.aspx)

> Coming Soon to MSDN Subscriptions – Visual Studio 2008 The next version of Visual Studio, Microsoft Visual Studio 2008, will provide an industry-leading developer experience for Windows Vista, the 2007 Microsoft Office system, and the Web. We expect to have Visual Studio 2008 editions available on MSDN Subscriber Downloads shortly after release. For a faster, more reliable download experience, please utilize “Top Downloads” below. All English Visual Studio 2008 editions will be available here first. Visual Studio 2008 editions also will be released—on a staggered schedule—to Subscriber Downloads. To find out more about the new versions, see the Visual Studio Developer Center. All English Visual Studio 2008 Editions will be available from “Top Downloads” below. Please utilize “Top Downloads” for a faster, more reliable download experience. 

[MSDN Blog post](https://web.archive.org/web/20080117164126/http://blogs.msdn.com/msdnsubscriptions/archive/2007/11/19/visual-studio-2008-is-now-live-on-msdn-subscriber-downloads.aspx)
