---
title: "Re: Microsoft Open Source"
date:  2007-10-20 00:00:00 -0700
layout: single
tags: [Microsoft, Windows]
---

Matthew Mullenweg at Photomatt.net "predicts" that:

> Microsoft will Open Source Windows before 2017.

While I usually like Matt's posts — I get them through the Wordpress control panel — I think that he might be a bit off this time. The Windows kernel is still under constant development and was derived from the DOS base architecture first founded in 1981.

This means that DOS is now 26 years old, almost 27.

Since MS-DOS hasn't been released under an Open Source license I think it's ridiculous to say that MS Windows will be releasing it under an O.S. license any time in the distant future — even with Open Source getting more and more popular.

An older product, BASIC which was first released on the Altair in 1975 (32 years old) is no longer being developed, is no longer being shipped with any Microsoft Operating Systems but has evolved in Microsoft's Visual Basic / Visual Basic .NET. Products which in their own right have helped form products like C# and the Visual Studio product line. While you could get the BASIC source "code" (in patch point form), later binary versions of BASIC aren't open and haven't been opened up ever since.

While Microsoft gives you many tools to build upon the Windows Platform, I don't think that Microsoft will open the source to Windows, not even Windows 1.0. I might be wrong — and I hope I am — but I got a pretty good feeling that current Microsoft CEO [Steve Ballmer](https://web.archive.org/web/20071014122137/http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dance_Monkeyboy) is more focussed on monetary rewards for him and Microsoft than anything else.

Source / Reference: [Microsoft Open Source](https://web.archive.org/web/20080117164440/http://photomatt.net/2007/10/20/microsoft-open-source/)
